---
comments: true
title: Git Notes
date: 2019-08-31 12:00:00
categories: [software, programming, git, version-control-system]
tags: [software, programming, git, version-control-system]
---

## Introduction to Version Control Systems (VCS)
### Local VCS

Many people’s version-control method of choice is to copy files into another (time-stamped) directory. 

> :heavy_check_mark: Simple
>
> :x: Error-prone

### Improved local VCS

VCS with a simple database that kept all the changes to files. One of the most popular VCS tools was *RCS*, which keeps patch sets (differences between files) in a special format on disk.

> :x: Collaboration with other developers is difficult

### Centralized VCS

CCVSs (such as *CVS*, *Subversion*, and *Perforce*) have a single server that contains all the versioned files and all clients that check out files from that central server.

> :heavy_check_mark: Collaboration with fine-grained permission control
>
> :x: Single-point failures of the central server, such as the server going down and a corrupted drive (you'll lose everything!)

### Distributed VCS

In DVCSs (such as *Git*, *Mercurial*, *Bazaar*, and *Darcs*), clients don't just check out the latest snapshot of the files but rather ***fully mirror the repository***, including the full history.

> :heavy_check_mark: Full backup at each client
>
> :heavy_check_mark: More flexible collaboration 

## Git in a Nutshell

### Snapshots

Git stores its data as a series of snapshots of a **miniature filesystem**, which is like a ***stream of snapshots***.

> Other VCSs store their data as a set of ***files*** and ***changes*** made to each file over time (This is called delta-based version control). 

### Local

> :heavy_check_mark: No network latency overhead

### Integrity

Everything in Git is checksummed ([SHA-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SHA-1) hash) before it is stored and is then referred to by that checksum. It's impossible to change the content of any file or directory without Git knowing about it.

### Undoable

In *Git*, almost all of your actions only add data to the Git database. It's hard to get the system to do anything that is not undoable.

> Happy experimenting! You won't screw up.:smiley:

### The Three Status :dart: 

In *Git*, files only have three status

1. *modified*

   You have ***changed*** the file, but have ***not committed*** it to your database yet. 

2. *staged*

   You have ***marked a modified file*** in the *current version* to go into your *next commit snapshot*.

3. *committed* 

   The file is ***safely*** stored in your local database.

Those three status leads to three sections of a Git project

1. Working tree

   A ***checkout*** of one version of the project. Files are pulled out of the compressed database and placed in your ***working directory***.

2. Staging area

   A *file* in your ***git directory*** (aka, `.git`) which stores information about what will go into your next commit. Its technical name in Git parlance is the `index`.

3. Git directory

   A *folder* where git stores the metadata and object database of your project.

```shell
pwd
/Users/zheng/Documents/GitHub/fun-with-home-lab

ls -al
drwxr-xr-x  15 zheng  staff    480 Aug 12 17:32 .git          
# This is the git directory, staging area is a file inside it.

-rw-r--r--   1 zheng  staff  35149 Aug  6 18:01 LICENSE
-rw-r--r--   1 zheng  staff    155 Aug  6 18:01 README.md
# This is the working tree
```
